# 5. Design Patterns

Just about every problem in software has been categorized and solved already. We call these patterns: design patterns, actually.

There are 3 categories of design patterns: **creational**, **structural**, and **behaviour**.

#### Creational <a href="#creational" id="creational"></a>

Creational patterns are patterns that control how objects are created.

Examples of creational patterns include:

* The **Singleton pattern**, for ensuring only a single instance of a class can exist
* The **Abstract Factory pattern**, for creating an instance of several families of classes
* The **Prototype pattern**, for starting out with an instance that is cloned from an existing one

#### Structural <a href="#structural" id="structural"></a>

Structural patterns are patterns that simplify how we define relationships between components.

Examples of structural design patterns include:

* The **Adapter pattern**, for creating an interface to enable classes that normally can't work together, to work together.
* The **Bridge pattern**, for splitting a class that should actually be one or more, into a set of classes that belong to a hierarchy, enabling the implementations to be developed independently of each other.
* The **Decorator pattern**, for adding responsibilities to objects dynamically.

#### Behavioural <a href="#behavioural" id="behavioural"></a>

Behavioural patterns are common patterns for facilitating elegant communication between objects.

Examples of behavioural patterns are:

* The **Template pattern**, for deferring the exact steps of an algorithm to a subclass.
* The **Mediator pattern**, for defining the exact communication channels allowed between classes.
* The **Observer pattern**, for enabling classes to subscribe to something of interest, and to be notified when a change occurred.

#### Design pattern criticisms <a href="#designpatterncriticisms" id="designpatterncriticisms"></a>

Design patterns are great and all, but sometimes they can an additional complexity to our designs. It's important to remember YAGNI and attempt to keep our designs as simple as possible. Only use design patterns when you're really sure you need them. You'll know when you will.

If we know what each of these patterns are, when to use them, and when to _not even bother_ using them, we're in good shape to begin to understand how to architect larger systems.

The reason behind that is because **architectural patterns are just design patterns blown-up in scale to the high-level**, where design patterns are low-level implementations (closer to classes and functions).

#### Resources <a href="#resources" id="resources"></a>

[Refactoring Guru - Design Patterns](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns)
