# 💡 What I do

{% hint style="info" %}
**GitBook tip:** A succinct video overview is a great way to introduce folks to your product. Embed a Loom, Vimeo or YouTube video and you're good to go! We love this video from the fine folks at Loom as a perfect example of a succinct feature overview.
{% endhint %}

An enthusiastic IT professional with around 20 years of experience having specialty in multi-cloud infrastructure automation and extensive experience with Linux (certified RHCE and RHSA), Java, Spring Boot, .Net, React, AWS, Azure, Kubernetes, Swift/iOS and Android native apps. Application migration, modernization and rearchitect expert. Certified Scrum Master having experience in Agile software development, and ITIL methodologies. Outstanding communication skills, results-oriented and an excellent ability to translate customer needs into technical solutions. Certified AWS Solution Architect Professional having experience with heterogeneous IT environments of high capacity, complexity and criticality in large enterprises.\
My current focus is on serverless computing, cloud native migration using Kubernetes, infrastructure automation (IaC) using TerraForm, and DevSecOps using OWASP DSOMM.An enthusiastic IT professional with around 20 years of experience having specialty in multi-cloud infrastructure automation and extensive experience with Linux (certified RHCE and RHSA), Java, Spring Boot, .Net, React, AWS, Azure, Kubernetes, Swift/iOS and Android native apps. Application migration, modernization and rearchitect expert. Certified Scrum Master having experience in Agile software development, and ITIL methodologies. Outstanding communication skills, results-oriented and an excellent ability to translate customer needs into technical solutions. Certified AWS Solution Architect Professional having experience with heterogeneous IT environments of high capacity, complexity and criticality in large enterprises. My current focus is on serverless computing, cloud native migration using Kubernetes, infrastructure automation (IaC) using TerraForm, and DevSecOps using OWASP DSOMM.
